# BM25 Information Retrieval

Note: Lucene uses BM25 (previously TF-IDF) for the "field weight" in its ranking function. Field weight quantifies how much a matched text is about the search term.

## TF-IDF
The previous standard in Lucene/Solor/ElasticSearch

- TF\*IDF measures the relative concentration of a term in a given piece of text. If “dog” is common in this article, but relatively rare elsewhere, then the TF\*IDF score will be high. This article ought to be thought of as very relevant to the search term “dog.” If “dog” occurs once here, but very prominently in many other docs, its score will be relatively low.
- An additional measure is the text’s length. “Dog” occurring twice in a 500 pg book says almost nothing about how much that book is about “dog”. “Dog” occurring twice in a short tweet, however, means that tweet is very much about “dog”! Thus an additional bias is introduced called *fieldNorms*. This contribution gives a significant bias towards matching shorter documents over longer documents.
$$ \text{vanilla TF-IDF} = \text{TF} * \text{IDF} * \text{fieldNorms} = \text{termFreq} \cdot \frac{numDocs}{docFreq + 1}  \cdot \frac{1}{\text{docLength}} $$

### TF-IDF in Lucene
The Information Retrieval field showed that raw TF-IDF values don’t quite correspond to user intuitions of relevance. If an article mentions “dog” six times, it is not exactly twice as relevant as an article mentioning “dog” 3 times. Similarly, for a term’s IDF, a term occurring in 500 docs is not twice as special as a term occurring in 1000.
- So they adjusted the terms by taking sqrt of tf and document length, and log of idf:
- Lucene Similarity:
$$ \text{Lucene TF-IDF} = \text{TF} * \text{IDF} * \text{fieldNorms} = \sqrt{termFreq} \cdot \log\left( \frac{numDocs}{docFreq + 1} \right) \cdot \frac{1}{\sqrt{docLength}} $$

## BM25
Stands for "Best Match 25", and improves upon tf-idf. Derived probabalistically based on [Probabilist Information Retrieval](https://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/html/htmledition/probabilistic-information-retrieval-1.html). Released in 1994.

- IDF term: Looks similar to classic Lucene IDF.

- TF term: Instead of sqrt, they asyptotically saturate the tf curve to $(k + 1)$. The default value of $k$ is 1.2
$$ \text{TF} = \frac{(k + 1) \ tf}{k + tf} $$
- Document Length term: It gets added to the TF term, such that the speed of saturation decreases as $L$ increases. Note: $L$ is doc length $|d|$ relative to average doc length.
$$ L = \frac{|d|}{\text{avgDocLength}}$$
$$ \text{TF} = \frac{(k + 1) \ tf}{k \ (1 - b + b * L) + tf} $$
$b$ controls the extent of influence of L.

All together:
$$ \text{BM25} = \text{IDF} * \frac{(k+1) \ tf}{k (1 - b + b  \frac{|d|}{avgDl}) + tf} $$

## References
1. Article: [BM25: next generation of Lucene relevance](https://opensourceconnections.com/blog/2015/10/16/bm25-the-next-generation-of-lucene-relevation/)
